block_notes_markers.adoc, before:

[[blocks_notes_markers]]
== Blocks, notes and markers

RISC-V specifications are notable for their extended commentaries that explain the thinking behind various important aspects of the technologies.

In most cases, contributors should make use of admonition blocks for their commentaries.


=== Blocks

Asciidoctor allows for many types of blocks, as documented at https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/blocks/.

Sidebars might be a good solution for some content in the specifications.

[source,adoc]
----
Text in your document.

****
This is content in a sidebar block.

image::name.png[]

This is more content in the sidebar block.
****
----

Sidebar:

[source,adoc]
----
.AsciiDoc history
****
AsciiDoc was first released in Nov 2002 by Stuart Rackham.
It was designed from the start to be a shorthand syntax
for producing professional documents like DocBook and LaTeX.
****
----

Rendered:

.AsciiDoc history
****
AsciiDoc was first released in Nov 2002 by Stuart Rackham.
It was designed from the start to be a shorthand syntax
for producing professional documents like DocBook and LaTeX.
****


=== Admonition blocks

Five kinds of standard admonition blocks are available in asciidoc and these can be mapped to either default or custom icons.

[source,adoc]
----
[NOTE]
====
This is an example of an admonition block.

Unlike an admonition paragraph, it may contain any AsciiDoc content.
The style can be any one of the admonition labels:

* NOTE
* TIP
* WARNING
* CAUTION
* IMPORTANT
====
----

This renders as:

[NOTE]
====
This is an example of an admonition block.

Unlike an admonition paragraph, it may contain any AsciiDoc content.
The style can be any one of the admonition labels:

* NOTE
* TIP
* WARNING
* CAUTION
* IMPORTANT
====

For a single paragraph admonition, simply use a double colon:

[source,adoc]
----
NOTE:: Note content.
----

which renders as:

NOTE:: Note content.


Block admonition:

[source,adoc]
----
[IMPORTANT]
.Feeding the Werewolves
====
While werewolves are hardy community members, keep in mind the following dietary concerns:

. They are allergic to cinnamon.
. More than two glasses of orange juice in 24 hours makes them howl in harmony with alarms and sirens.
. Celery makes them sad.
====
----

Rendered:

[IMPORTANT]
.Feeding the Werewolves
====
While werewolves are hardy community members, keep in mind the following dietary concerns:

. They are allergic to cinnamon.
. More than two glasses of orange juice in 24 hours makes them howl in harmony with alarms and sirens.
. Celery makes them sad.
====


https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor-pdf/blob/master/docs/theming-guide.adoc#key-prefix-admonition-icon


Alternate admonition icons are available at: https://github.com/jessedoyle/prawn-icon/tree/master/data/fonts


=== Footnotes

Asciidoc has a limitation in that footnotes appear at the end of each chapter. Asciidoctor does not support footnotes appearing at the bottom of each page.

You can add footnotes to your presentation using the footnote macro. If you plan to reference a footnote more than once, use the footnote macro with a target that you identify in the brackets.

[source,adoc]
----
The hail-and-rainbow protocol can be initiated at three levels:

. doublefootnote:[The double hail-and-rainbow level makes my toes tingle.]
. tertiary
. apocalyptic

A bold statement!footnote:disclaimer[Opinions are my own.]

Another outrageous statement.footnote:disclaimer[]
----

Renders as:

The hail-and-rainbow protocol can be initiated at three levels:

. doublefootnote:[The double hail-and-rainbow level makes my toes tingle.]
. tertiary
. apocalyptic

A bold statement!footnote:disclaimer[Opinions are my own.]

Another outrageous statement.footnote:disclaimer[]

=== Index markers

There are two types of index terms in AsciiDoc:

*A flow index term.* appears in the flow of text (a visible term) and in the index. This type of index term can only be used to define a primary entry:

[source,adoc]
----
indexterm2:[<primary>] or ((<primary>))
----

*A concealed index term.* a group of index terms that appear only in the index. This type of index term can be used to define a primary entry as well as optional secondary and tertiary entries:

[source,adoc]
----
indexterm:[<primary>, <secondary>, <tertiary>]
----

--or--

[source,adoc]
----
(((<primary>, <secondary>, <tertiary>)))
----

[source,adoc]
----
The Lady of the Lake, her arm clad in the purest shimmering samite,
held aloft Excalibur from the bosom of the water,
signifying by divine providence that I, ((Arthur)), <1>
was to carry Excalibur (((Sword, Broadsword, Excalibur))). <2>
That is why I am your king. Shut up! Will you shut up?!
Burn her anyway! I'm not a witch.
Look, my liege! We found them.

indexterm2:[Lancelot] was one of the Knights of the Round Table. <3>
indexterm:[knight, Knight of the Round Table, Lancelot] <4>
----

<1> The double parenthesis form adds a primary index term and includes the term in the generated output.
<2> The triple parenthesis form allows for an optional second and third index term and does not include the terms in the generated output (a concealed index term).
<3> The inline macro `indexterm2\:[primary]` is equivalent to the double parenthesis form.
<4> The inline macro `indexterm:\[primary, secondary, tertiary]`` is equivalent to the triple parenthesis form.

If you’re defining a concealed index term (the indexterm macro), and one of the terms contains a comma, you must surround that segment in double quotes so the comma is treated as content. For example:

[source,adoc]
----
I, King Arthur.
indexterm:[knight, "Arthur, King"]
----

I, King Arthur.
indexterm:[knight, "Arthur, King"]

--or--

[source,adoc]
----
I, King Arthur.
(((knight, "Arthur, King")))
----

I, King Arthur.
(((knight, "Arthur, King")))

Commit message:

set example admonition icons and their colors

block_notes_markers.adoc, after:

[[blocks_notes_markers]]
== Blocks, notes and markers

RISC-V specifications are notable for their extended commentaries that explain the thinking behind various important aspects of the technologies.

In most cases, contributors should make use of admonition blocks for their commentaries.


=== Blocks

Asciidoctor allows for many types of blocks, as documented at https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/blocks/.

Sidebars might be a good solution for some content in the specifications.

[source,adoc]
----
Text in your document.

****
This is content in a sidebar block.

image::name.png[]

This is more content in the sidebar block.
****
----

Sidebar:

[source,adoc]
----
.AsciiDoc history
****
AsciiDoc was first released in Nov 2002 by Stuart Rackham.
It was designed from the start to be a shorthand syntax
for producing professional documents like DocBook and LaTeX.
****
----

Rendered:

.AsciiDoc history
****
AsciiDoc was first released in Nov 2002 by Stuart Rackham.
It was designed from the start to be a shorthand syntax
for producing professional documents like DocBook and LaTeX.
****


=== Admonition blocks

Five kinds of standard admonition blocks are available in asciidoc and these can be mapped to either default or custom icons.

[source,adoc]
----
[NOTE]
====
This is an example of an admonition block.

Unlike an admonition paragraph, it may contain any AsciiDoc content.
The style can be any one of the admonition labels:

* NOTE
* TIP
* WARNING
* CAUTION
* IMPORTANT
====
----

This renders as:

[NOTE]
====
This is an example of an admonition block.

Unlike an admonition paragraph, it may contain any AsciiDoc content.
The style can be any one of the admonition labels:

* NOTE
* TIP
* WARNING
* CAUTION
* IMPORTANT
====

For a single paragraph admonition, simply use a double colon:

[source,adoc]
----
NOTE: Note content.
----

which renders as:

NOTE: Note content.


Another example of an admonition block:

[source,adoc]
----
[IMPORTANT]
.Feeding the Werewolves
====
While werewolves are hardy community members, keep in mind the following dietary concerns:

. They are allergic to cinnamon.
. More than two glasses of orange juice in 24 hours makes them howl in harmony with alarms and sirens.
. Celery makes them sad.
====
----

Rendered:

[IMPORTANT]
.Feeding the Werewolves
====
While werewolves are hardy community members, keep in mind the following dietary concerns:

. They are allergic to cinnamon.
. More than two glasses of orange juice in 24 hours makes them howl in harmony with alarms and sirens.
. Celery makes them sad.
====


https://github.com/asciidoctor/asciidoctor-pdf/blob/master/docs/theming-guide.adoc#key-prefix-admonition-icon

The default admonition icons don't look right for RISK-V specification, and alternate icons and colors have been set in risc-v_spec-pdf.yml.  and will be considered.

Current icons, edited to tone down color:

NOTE: note

TIP: tip

WARNING: warning

CAUTION: caution

IMPORTANT: important


[#custom-color-icons]
.Customized colors for icons
[width="100%",options=header,format=csv]
|===
Icon,default,customized
NOTE,19407c,6489b3
TIP,111111,535a63
WARNING,bf6900,9c4d4b
CAUTION,bf3400,c99a2c
IMPORTANT,bf0000,b58f5b
|===




=== Footnotes

Asciidoc has a limitation in that footnotes appear at the end of each chapter. Asciidoctor does not support footnotes appearing at the bottom of each page.

You can add footnotes to your presentation using the footnote macro. If you plan to reference a footnote more than once, use the footnote macro with a target that you identify in the brackets.

[source,adoc]
----
The hail-and-rainbow protocol can be initiated at three levels:

. doublefootnote:[The double hail-and-rainbow level makes my toes tingle.]
. tertiary
. apocalyptic

A bold statement!footnote:disclaimer[Opinions are my own.]

Another outrageous statement.footnote:disclaimer[]
----

Renders as:

The hail-and-rainbow protocol can be initiated at three levels:

. doublefootnote:[The double hail-and-rainbow level makes my toes tingle.]
. tertiary
. apocalyptic

A bold statement!footnote:disclaimer[Opinions are my own.]

Another outrageous statement.footnote:disclaimer[]

=== Index markers

There are two types of index terms in AsciiDoc:

*A flow index term.* appears in the flow of text (a visible term) and in the index. This type of index term can only be used to define a primary entry:

[source,adoc]
----
indexterm2:[<primary>] or ((<primary>))
----

*A concealed index term.* a group of index terms that appear only in the index. This type of index term can be used to define a primary entry as well as optional secondary and tertiary entries:

[source,adoc]
----
indexterm:[<primary>, <secondary>, <tertiary>]
----

--or--

[source,adoc]
----
(((<primary>, <secondary>, <tertiary>)))
----

[source,adoc]
----
The Lady of the Lake, her arm clad in the purest shimmering samite,
held aloft Excalibur from the bosom of the water,
signifying by divine providence that I, ((Arthur)), <1>
was to carry Excalibur (((Sword, Broadsword, Excalibur))). <2>
That is why I am your king. Shut up! Will you shut up?!
Burn her anyway! I'm not a witch.
Look, my liege! We found them.

indexterm2:[Lancelot] was one of the Knights of the Round Table. <3>
indexterm:[knight, Knight of the Round Table, Lancelot] <4>
----

<1> The double parenthesis form adds a primary index term and includes the term in the generated output.
<2> The triple parenthesis form allows for an optional second and third index term and does not include the terms in the generated output (a concealed index term).
<3> The inline macro `indexterm2\:[primary]` is equivalent to the double parenthesis form.
<4> The inline macro `indexterm:\[primary, secondary, tertiary]`` is equivalent to the triple parenthesis form.

If you’re defining a concealed index term (the indexterm macro), and one of the terms contains a comma, you must surround that segment in double quotes so the comma is treated as content. For example:

[source,adoc]
----
I, King Arthur.
indexterm:[knight, "Arthur, King"]
----

I, King Arthur.
indexterm:[knight, "Arthur, King"]

--or--

[source,adoc]
----
I, King Arthur.
(((knight, "Arthur, King")))
----

I, King Arthur.
(((knight, "Arthur, King")))
