src/blocks_notes_markers.adoc, before:

[[blocks_notes_markers]]
=== Admonition blocks

Five kinds of standard admonition blocks are available in AsciiDoc. RISC-V uses these 5 standards with the default icons. Note that the admonition type is not displayed, only the icon.

Note:: Highlight extra information that should stand out from the rest of the text. A "by the way, you should know this" statement.

Caution:: Warns users about a condition or action that can lead to bad outcomes such as personal injury or damage equipment). A "we don’t recommend" statement.

Warning:: Warns users about a situation that is undesirable. A "Do not do this!" or "You must do this" statement.

Important:: Information that a user must have. For example, "After you set your password, you cannot change it."

Tip:: Used for Non-normative text such as clarification or hints for implementers or to convey design rationale and why other options were discontinued. RISC-V tech team is working on a solution that will allow these admonitions to be turned off.

As a general rule, follow these guidelines for admonitions:

* Understand that admonitions are interruptions. They should be relevant to the topic, but not necessary. If the reader skips reading it, they can still succeed.
* If the information is necessary, make it part of the topic and even add a heading. Don't put it in an admonition.
* Limit admonitions to a maximum of 3 on a page (standard PDF page - longer HTML pages can use more.)
* Do not include results, steps, or prerequisites in admonitions.
* Make your admonition clear and concise.

==== Single paragraph admonition

For a single paragraph admonition, use a double colon:

[source,adoc]
----
NOTE: Note content.
----

which renders as:

NOTE: Note content.

==== Admonition blocks

An admonition block can contain any AsciiDoc content.

[source,adoc]
----
[IMPORTANT]
====
As a general rule, follow these guidelines for admonitions:

* Understand that admonitions are interruptions. They should be relevant to the topic, but not necessary. If the reader skips reading it, they can still succeed.
* If the information is necessary, make it part of the topic and even add a heading. Don't put it in an admonition.
* Limit admonitions to a maximum of 3 on a page (standard PDF page - longer HTML pages can use more.)
* Do not include results, steps, or prerequisites in admonitions.
* Make your admonition clear and concise.
====
----

which renders as:

[IMPORTANT]
====
As a general rule, follow these guidelines for admonitions:

* Understand that admonitions are interruptions. They should be relevant to the topic, but not necessary. If the reader skips reading it, they can still succeed.
* If the information is necessary, make it part of the topic and even add a heading. Don't put it in an admonition.
* Limit admonitions to a maximum of 3 on a page (standard PDF page - longer HTML pages can use more.)
* Do not include results, steps, or prerequisites in admonitions.
* Make your admonition clear and concise.
====

==== Admonition with a title

You can add a title to your admonition block.

[source,adoc]
----
[WARNING]
.Security vulnerability
====
*Be aware that RLB introduces a security vulnerability if it is set after the boot process is over.* Use with caution, even when you use it temporarily. Editable PMP rules in M-mode gives a false sense of security since it only takes a few malicious instructions to lift any PMP restrictions this way. It doesn’t make sense to have a security control in place and leave it unprotected. Rule Locking Bypass is only meant as a way to optimize the allocation of PMP rules, catch errors durring debugging, and allow the bootrom/firmware to register executable _Shared-Region_ rules. If developers / vendors have no use for such functionality, they should never set ``mseccfg.RLB`` and if possible hard-wire it to 0. In any case *RLB should be disabled and locked as soon as possible*.
====
----

Rendered:

[WARNING]
.Security vulnerability
====
*Be aware that RLB introduces a security vulnerability if it is set after the boot process is over.* Use with caution, even when you use it temporarily. Editable PMP rules in M-mode gives a false sense of security since it only takes a few malicious instructions to lift any PMP restrictions this way. It doesn’t make sense to have a security control in place and leave it unprotected. Rule Locking Bypass is only meant as a way to optimize the allocation of PMP rules, catch errors durring debugging, and allow the bootrom/firmware to register executable _Shared-Region_ rules. If developers / vendors have no use for such functionality, they should never set ``mseccfg.RLB`` and if possible hard-wire it to 0. In any case *RLB should be disabled and locked as soon as possible*.
====

==== RISC-V admonition icon colors

The admonition icons are set in `risc-v_spec-pdf.yml`. RISC-V uses custom colors, as indicated in the <<custom-color-icons>>.

NOTE: note

TIP: tip

WARNING: warning

CAUTION: caution

IMPORTANT: important

[[custom-color-icons]]
.Customized colors for icons
[width="100%",options=header,format=csv]
|===
Icon,default,customized
NOTE,19407c,6489b3
TIP,111111,5g27ag
WARNING,bf6900,9c4d4b
CAUTION,bf3400,c99a2c
IMPORTANT,bf0000,b58f5b
|===


=== Code blocks

AsciiDoc enables code blocks that support syntax highlighting.

For example, preceding a block with a macro `[source,json]` enables `json` syntax highlighting:

[source,json]
----
{
    "weather": {
        "city":       "Zurich",
        "temperature":      25,
    }
}
----

While syntax highlighters for machine code that integrate with the Asciidoctor Ruby toolchain do leave something to be desired, the Rouge highlighter enables line numbers within the code examples.

We are numbering examples as in the following:

[source,adoc]
----
.A spinlock with fences
[source%linenums,asm]
....
          sd           x1, (a1)     # Arbitrary unrelated store
          ld           x2, (a2)     # Arbitrary unrelated load
          li           t0, 1        # Initialize swap value.
      again:
          amoswap.w    t0, t0, (a0) # Attempt to acquire lock.
          fence        r, rw        # Enforce "acquire" memory ordering
          bnez         t0, again    # Retry if held.
          # ...
          # Critical section.
          # ...
          fence        rw, w        # Enforce "release" memory ordering
          amoswap.w    x0, x0, (a0) # Release lock by storing 0.
          sd           x3, (a3)     # Arbitrary unrelated store
          ld           x4, (a4)     # Arbitrary unrelated load
....
----

With the following result:

[[spinlock_fences]]
.A spinlock with fences
[source%linenums,asm]
....
          sd           x1, (a1)     # Arbitrary unrelated store
          ld           x2, (a2)     # Arbitrary unrelated load
          li           t0, 1        # Initialize swap value.
      again:
          amoswap.w    t0, t0, (a0) # Attempt to acquire lock.
          fence        r, rw        # Enforce "acquire" memory ordering
          bnez         t0, again    # Retry if held.
          # ...
          # Critical section.
          # ...
          fence        rw, w        # Enforce "release" memory ordering
          amoswap.w    x0, x0, (a0) # Release lock by storing 0.
          sd           x3, (a3)     # Arbitrary unrelated store
          ld           x4, (a4)     # Arbitrary unrelated load
....


=== Change bars

Change indicators within text files are exceedingly useful and also can be equally complex to implement. Please consider the fact that much of the software programming for Git revolves around handling various kinds of change indicators.

In exploring possible implementation of change bars for RISC-V, we have looked for a solution that is as simple as possible while maximizing value with respect to the time invested in implementing, maintaining, and using the tools and procedures.

The suggested solution makes use of:

- an AsciiDoc `role`.
- modification of two files in the Ruby gem with code snippets (see procedure in the README for https://github.com/riscv/docs-templates).
- Git features.
- a few procedures associated, specifically, with Git updates.

==== Indicate changes

Indicators for the changed lines must be inserted manually:

[source,adoc]
----
[.Changed]#SELECT clause#

Text without the change bar

[.Changed]#Text with the change bar#
----

[.Changed]#SELECT clause#

Text without the change bar

[.Changed]#Text with the change bar#


For change bars associated with headings, place the change indicator after the heading indicator and before the text, like the following:

----
== [.Changed]#SELECT clause#
----

==== Check for changed lines before a `git commit`

You can double check for all changed lines before committing by using this pattern:

[source,cmd]
----
git blame <file> | grep -n '^0\{8\} ' | cut -f1 -d:
----

This lists the line numbers of changes within the specified file like the following example:

[source,cmd]
----
5
38
109
237
----


=== Footnotes

AsciiDoc has a limitation in that footnotes appear at the end of each chapter. Asciidoctor does not support footnotes appearing at the bottom of each page.

You can add footnotes to your presentation using the footnote macro. If you plan to reference a footnote more than once, use the footnote macro with a target that you identify in the brackets.

[source,adoc]
----
Initiate the hail-and-rainbow protocol at one of three levels:

- doublefootnote:[The double hail-and-rainbow level makes my toes tingle.]
- tertiary
- apocalyptic

A bold statement!footnote:disclaimer[Opinions are my own.]

Another outrageous statement.footnote:disclaimer[]
----

Renders as:

The hail-and-rainbow protocol can be initiated at three levels:

- doublefootnote:[The double hail-and-rainbow level makes my toes tingle.]
- tertiary
- apocalyptic

A bold statement!footnote:disclaimer[Opinions are my own.]

Another outrageous statement.footnote:disclaimer[]

=== Sidebars

Sidebars provide for a form of commentary.

[source,adoc]
----

****
This is content in a sidebar block.

image:example-3.svg[]

This is more content in the sidebar block.
****
----

This renders as follows:

****
This is content in a sidebar block.

image:example-3.svg[]

This is more content in the sidebar block.
****


You can add a title, along with any kind of content. Best practice for many of the "commentaries" in the LaTeX source that elucidate the decision-making process is to convert to this format with the `TIP` icon that illustrates a conversation or discussion, as in the following example:

[source,adoc]
----
.Optional Title
****
Sidebars are used to visually separate auxiliary bits of content
that supplement the main text.

TIP: They can contain any type of content, including admonitions like this, and code examples like the following.

.Source code block within a sidebar
[source,js]
/----   (1)
const { expect, expectCalledWith, heredoc } = require('../test/test-utils')
/----  (2)
****

----

1 and 2. Escapes are necessary to preserve this as an AsciiDoc code example.

Once the escapes are removed, the above renders with both the admonition and code blocks within the sidebar:

.Optional Title
****
Sidebars are used to visually separate auxiliary bits of content
that supplement the main text.

TIP: They can contain any type of content, including admonitions like this, and code examples like the following.

.Source code block in a sidebar
[source,js]
----
const { expect, expectCalledWith, heredoc } = require('../test/test-utils')
----
****

Commit message:

clean up wording, add link to adoc docs, add examples to see icons
Signed-off-by: Kevin Broch <kbroch@rivosinc.com>

src/blocks_notes_markers.adoc, after:

[[blocks_notes_markers]]
=== Admonition blocks

Five types of standard link:https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/blocks/admonitions/[admonition blocks] are available in AsciiDoc. RISC-V uses these five types with the default icons.

NOTE: The admonition type is not displayed, only the icon.

Note:: Highlight extra information that should stand out from the rest of the text. A "by the way, you should know this" statement.

NOTE: example of note type

Caution:: Cautions users about a condition or action that can lead to bad outcomes such as personal injury or damage equipment. A "we don’t recommend" statement.

CAUTION: example of caution type

Warning:: Warns users about a situation that is undesirable. A "Do not do this!" or "You must do this" statement.

WARNING: example of warning type

Important:: Information that a user must have. For example, "After you set your password, you cannot change it."

IMPORTANT: example of important type

Tip:: Used for Non-normative text such as clarification or hints for implementers or to convey design rationale and why other options were discontinued. RISC-V tech team is working on a solution that will allow these admonitions to be turned off.

TIP: example of tip type

As a general rule, follow these guidelines for admonitions:

* Understand that admonitions are interruptions. They should be relevant to the topic, but not necessary. If the reader skips reading it, they can still succeed.
* If the information is necessary, make it part of the topic and even add a heading. Don't put it in an admonition.
* Limit admonitions to a maximum of 3 on a page (standard PDF page - longer HTML pages can use more.)
* Do not include results, steps, or prerequisites in admonitions.
* Make your admonition clear and concise.

==== Single paragraph admonition

For a single paragraph admonition, use a double colon:

[source,adoc]
----
NOTE: Note content.
----

which renders as:

NOTE: Note content.

==== Admonition blocks

An admonition block can contain any AsciiDoc content.

[source,adoc]
----
[IMPORTANT]
====
As a general rule, follow these guidelines for admonitions:

* Understand that admonitions are interruptions. They should be relevant to the topic, but not necessary. If the reader skips reading it, they can still succeed.
* If the information is necessary, make it part of the topic and even add a heading. Don't put it in an admonition.
* Limit admonitions to a maximum of 3 on a page (standard PDF page - longer HTML pages can use more.)
* Do not include results, steps, or prerequisites in admonitions.
* Make your admonition clear and concise.
====
----

which renders as:

[IMPORTANT]
====
As a general rule, follow these guidelines for admonitions:

* Understand that admonitions are interruptions. They should be relevant to the topic, but not necessary. If the reader skips reading it, they can still succeed.
* If the information is necessary, make it part of the topic and even add a heading. Don't put it in an admonition.
* Limit admonitions to a maximum of 3 on a page (standard PDF page - longer HTML pages can use more.)
* Do not include results, steps, or prerequisites in admonitions.
* Make your admonition clear and concise.
====

==== Admonition with a title

You can add a title to your admonition block.

[source,adoc]
----
[WARNING]
.Security vulnerability
====
*Be aware that RLB introduces a security vulnerability if it is set after the boot process is over.* Use with caution, even when you use it temporarily. Editable PMP rules in M-mode gives a false sense of security since it only takes a few malicious instructions to lift any PMP restrictions this way. It doesn’t make sense to have a security control in place and leave it unprotected. Rule Locking Bypass is only meant as a way to optimize the allocation of PMP rules, catch errors durring debugging, and allow the bootrom/firmware to register executable _Shared-Region_ rules. If developers / vendors have no use for such functionality, they should never set ``mseccfg.RLB`` and if possible hard-wire it to 0. In any case *RLB should be disabled and locked as soon as possible*.
====
----

Rendered:

[WARNING]
.Security vulnerability
====
*Be aware that RLB introduces a security vulnerability if it is set after the boot process is over.* Use with caution, even when you use it temporarily. Editable PMP rules in M-mode gives a false sense of security since it only takes a few malicious instructions to lift any PMP restrictions this way. It doesn’t make sense to have a security control in place and leave it unprotected. Rule Locking Bypass is only meant as a way to optimize the allocation of PMP rules, catch errors durring debugging, and allow the bootrom/firmware to register executable _Shared-Region_ rules. If developers / vendors have no use for such functionality, they should never set ``mseccfg.RLB`` and if possible hard-wire it to 0. In any case *RLB should be disabled and locked as soon as possible*.
====

==== RISC-V admonition icon colors

The admonition icons are set in `risc-v_spec-pdf.yml`. RISC-V uses custom colors, as indicated in the <<custom-color-icons>>.

NOTE: note

TIP: tip

WARNING: warning

CAUTION: caution

IMPORTANT: important

[[custom-color-icons]]
.Customized colors for icons
[width="100%",options=header,format=csv]
|===
Icon,default,customized
NOTE,19407c,6489b3
TIP,111111,5g27ag
WARNING,bf6900,9c4d4b
CAUTION,bf3400,c99a2c
IMPORTANT,bf0000,b58f5b
|===


=== Code blocks

AsciiDoc enables code blocks that support syntax highlighting.

For example, preceding a block with a macro `[source,json]` enables `json` syntax highlighting:

[source,json]
----
{
    "weather": {
        "city":       "Zurich",
        "temperature":      25,
    }
}
----

While syntax highlighters for machine code that integrate with the Asciidoctor Ruby toolchain do leave something to be desired, the Rouge highlighter enables line numbers within the code examples.

We are numbering examples as in the following:

[source,adoc]
----
.A spinlock with fences
[source%linenums,asm]
....
          sd           x1, (a1)     # Arbitrary unrelated store
          ld           x2, (a2)     # Arbitrary unrelated load
          li           t0, 1        # Initialize swap value.
      again:
          amoswap.w    t0, t0, (a0) # Attempt to acquire lock.
          fence        r, rw        # Enforce "acquire" memory ordering
          bnez         t0, again    # Retry if held.
          # ...
          # Critical section.
          # ...
          fence        rw, w        # Enforce "release" memory ordering
          amoswap.w    x0, x0, (a0) # Release lock by storing 0.
          sd           x3, (a3)     # Arbitrary unrelated store
          ld           x4, (a4)     # Arbitrary unrelated load
....
----

With the following result:

[[spinlock_fences]]
.A spinlock with fences
[source%linenums,asm]
....
          sd           x1, (a1)     # Arbitrary unrelated store
          ld           x2, (a2)     # Arbitrary unrelated load
          li           t0, 1        # Initialize swap value.
      again:
          amoswap.w    t0, t0, (a0) # Attempt to acquire lock.
          fence        r, rw        # Enforce "acquire" memory ordering
          bnez         t0, again    # Retry if held.
          # ...
          # Critical section.
          # ...
          fence        rw, w        # Enforce "release" memory ordering
          amoswap.w    x0, x0, (a0) # Release lock by storing 0.
          sd           x3, (a3)     # Arbitrary unrelated store
          ld           x4, (a4)     # Arbitrary unrelated load
....


=== Change bars

Change indicators within text files are exceedingly useful and also can be equally complex to implement. Please consider the fact that much of the software programming for Git revolves around handling various kinds of change indicators.

In exploring possible implementation of change bars for RISC-V, we have looked for a solution that is as simple as possible while maximizing value with respect to the time invested in implementing, maintaining, and using the tools and procedures.

The suggested solution makes use of:

- an AsciiDoc `role`.
- modification of two files in the Ruby gem with code snippets (see procedure in the README for https://github.com/riscv/docs-templates).
- Git features.
- a few procedures associated, specifically, with Git updates.

==== Indicate changes

Indicators for the changed lines must be inserted manually:

[source,adoc]
----
[.Changed]#SELECT clause#

Text without the change bar

[.Changed]#Text with the change bar#
----

[.Changed]#SELECT clause#

Text without the change bar

[.Changed]#Text with the change bar#


For change bars associated with headings, place the change indicator after the heading indicator and before the text, like the following:

----
== [.Changed]#SELECT clause#
----

==== Check for changed lines before a `git commit`

You can double check for all changed lines before committing by using this pattern:

[source,cmd]
----
git blame <file> | grep -n '^0\{8\} ' | cut -f1 -d:
----

This lists the line numbers of changes within the specified file like the following example:

[source,cmd]
----
5
38
109
237
----


=== Footnotes

AsciiDoc has a limitation in that footnotes appear at the end of each chapter. Asciidoctor does not support footnotes appearing at the bottom of each page.

You can add footnotes to your presentation using the footnote macro. If you plan to reference a footnote more than once, use the footnote macro with a target that you identify in the brackets.

[source,adoc]
----
Initiate the hail-and-rainbow protocol at one of three levels:

- doublefootnote:[The double hail-and-rainbow level makes my toes tingle.]
- tertiary
- apocalyptic

A bold statement!footnote:disclaimer[Opinions are my own.]

Another outrageous statement.footnote:disclaimer[]
----

Renders as:

The hail-and-rainbow protocol can be initiated at three levels:

- doublefootnote:[The double hail-and-rainbow level makes my toes tingle.]
- tertiary
- apocalyptic

A bold statement!footnote:disclaimer[Opinions are my own.]

Another outrageous statement.footnote:disclaimer[]

=== Sidebars

Sidebars provide for a form of commentary.

[source,adoc]
----

****
This is content in a sidebar block.

image:example-3.svg[]

This is more content in the sidebar block.
****
----

This renders as follows:

****
This is content in a sidebar block.

image:example-3.svg[]

This is more content in the sidebar block.
****


You can add a title, along with any kind of content. Best practice for many of the "commentaries" in the LaTeX source that elucidate the decision-making process is to convert to this format with the `TIP` icon that illustrates a conversation or discussion, as in the following example:

[source,adoc]
----
.Optional Title
****
Sidebars are used to visually separate auxiliary bits of content
that supplement the main text.

TIP: They can contain any type of content, including admonitions like this, and code examples like the following.

.Source code block within a sidebar
[source,js]
/----   (1)
const { expect, expectCalledWith, heredoc } = require('../test/test-utils')
/----  (2)
****

----

1 and 2. Escapes are necessary to preserve this as an AsciiDoc code example.

Once the escapes are removed, the above renders with both the admonition and code blocks within the sidebar:

.Optional Title
****
Sidebars are used to visually separate auxiliary bits of content
that supplement the main text.

TIP: They can contain any type of content, including admonitions like this, and code examples like the following.

.Source code block in a sidebar
[source,js]
----
const { expect, expectCalledWith, heredoc } = require('../test/test-utils')
----
****
